Introduce RFC to correlate resource inputs with output (#799)
vmware-tanzu/cartographer: rfc/rfc-0000-input-output-correlation.md

the resource, Cartographer does not provide an agnostic means to leverage this. This means users must delve into these
resources and make these inferences themselves. Doing so requires more explicit knowledge of exploring resources, is
laborious, and error-prone.

While this RFC does not directly propose UX changes to enable this, it describes mechanisms that enable Cartographer to
internally recognize which inputs yield a given output, which can be used as the basis for UX changes.

## What use cases does it support?

The changes proposed here do not surface the correlation between inputs and outputs, but they introduce mechanics which
will enable us to build features which do so.

An interesting side effect of these mechanics is that Cartographer will not propagate artifacts output by a resource to
the next resource unless they can be correlated to input provided to the resource by Cartographer. This is desirable
from a security perspective, and the outcomes of this behavior are explored in detail in the
[Draft RFC Read Resources Only When In Success State](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/556).

# What it is

[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> New fields are added to templates which allow template authors to specify correlation rules using `observedMatches`,

Reviewer: Cartographer already has a template with the top level field `observedMatches`: [ClusterDeploymentTemplate](https://cartographer.sh/docs/v0.3.0/reference/template/#clusterdeploymenttemplate).

The proposed `ObservedMatches` works differently than this prior art. The existing implementation matches two fields that exist on the stamped object. The proposal matches fields on the template to fields on the stamped object.

1. Should the name change so that artifact tracing can work with ClusterDeploymentTemplate?
2. Should the name change so that we don't overload a term with two implementations?

Reviewer: We can assume that fields in the template exist on the spec of the object. Do we need ObservedMatches to match from template to object? Or can we use the same implementation that exists on ClusterDeploymentTemplate, where users are expected to compare the object's spec to its status?

This implementation has the advantage of allowing users to specify `metadata.generation` must equal `status.observedGeneration` explicitly.

Author: Good catch on naming. Actually I noticed the names are not even consistent in my document. I'm going to rename to `correlationRules` for the next iteration.

With regards to the matching implementation, I think matching metadata.generation to status.observedGeneration implicitly in the cases where it is needed helps guarantee mechanics work as desired. There are also stipulations under #spec-changes which also try to limit jsonpath expressions to intended uses.

For cases where the output does not contain necessary information to match against inputs, one may instead match against
the spec of the resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: carto.run/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterImageTemplate
metadata:
  name: example-image-building-thing
spec:
  template:
    apiVersion: my-builder/v1
    kind: ImageBuilderThatDoesntExposeInputDetailsInItsOutput
    metadata:
      name: ...
    spec:
      sourceUrl: "$(sources.source.url)$"
      sourceRevision: "$(sources.source.url)$"
observedMatches:
  - input: "$(sources.source.url)"              #evaluated against inputs in template context
    output: "$(spec.sourceUrl)"                 #evaluated against resource spec
  - input: "$(sources.source.revision)"         #evaluated against inputs in template context
    output: "$(spec.sourceRevision)"            #evaluated against resource spec
```

Since the spec of the resource may change independently of the output, when the `outputMatches` makes any assertion
against the `spec`, Cartographer must also ensure that the current output is a result of processing the current spec by
making additional assertions:

> * Resource is healthy, as per [Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)

Reviewer: Won't healthy/unhealthy be a concern for resources where the observedMatch is to a field in the status (as well as for resources where the observedMatch is to a field in the spec).

Author: The healthy check only exists when the `spec` is implicated because we're relying on fields in the spec corresponding to the status.

Once the output is in the status, it is true that the resource may reconcile again and be unhealthy, but as long as the exact inputs specified in correlation rules match the output we can reasonably assume it is the same input.

This, as `#drawbacks` states is the reason why the template authors must take great care. The matching rules must uniquely identify the instance of the input (e.g. as with URL+revision for a source)

Author: Actually, I take that back. I think you're right, otherwise we may not always be able to correlate inputs and outputs.

* Resource `observedGeneration == generation`

If these assertions cannot be made, for example, if the resource does not implement the `observedGeneration` pattern,
then Cartographer stops processing the resource and flags an error on it. Great care must also be taken that `healthy`
status rules specified by the template author corresponds to the situation where the output is indeed a result of the
spec with the current `observedGeneration`, otherwise outputs may not truly be the result of an input.

Additionally, relying on the spec to make assertions imposes a further restriction to avoid stalling artifact

> propagation: Cartographer must not stamp out any further changes to the resource until it has finished processing the

Reviewer: Above, the RFC states that
> Cartographer will not propagate artifacts output
which I refer to as _reading_ an object.
Here the RFC states
> Cartographer must not stamp out any further changes to the resource
which I refer to as _writing_ an object.

Is this proposal to hold reads or writes or both?

Author: Both.

current spec completely. That is, it must have reached either a Healthy or Unhealthy status (as per
[Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)).

# Migration

[migration]: #migration

All templates must have `outputMatches` added to them.

Any template which requires `outputMatches` against the resource spec must also be configured to identify success,
failure and unknown states - which map to Healthy, Unhealthy and Unknown if the mechanism to be relied upon is
[Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738).

> # Drawbacks

Reviewer: Supply chains often rely on resources that continually report the latest good output (e.g. kpack). When such an object is processing new input, Cartographer is still able to read the output and use it to assert the proper shape of the following object.

WIth this proposal, Cartographer will need to adopt a caching strategy after reading good outputs of objects. Consider the case of a supply chain where resource B relies on resource A. When resource A has a good output, it will at some point get an update to its spec. It will begin process the new spec and `Healthy` will become unknown. As a result, Cartographer will no longer read resource A's output. That means that Cartographer will now be unable to assure that resource B has the proper spec, so resource B will be unreadable as well.

Author: I see. A cache, that is, or something like `lastGoodOtput` on the status in your [original RFC](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/556)?

Reviewer 2: Where is the cache stored? Assume that the controller pod will crash or be rescheduled at an inconvenient time; a new controller instance needs to be able to pickup and continue processing as if nothing happened.

Author: It would be very convenient to put it on the owner status, but this may cause us to exceed maximum size. One thing we've discussed privately within the team is storing outputs as another custom resource. The latter feels like it may be the only choice, barring the addition of another component for durable cache storage.

* Holding spec updates is another bottleneck which can further slow processing;
* Resources must implement `observedGeneration` pattern;
* It must be possible to determine if the resources are still processing (Unknown state, as per
  [Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)).
* Great responsibility is placed on template authors to write correct `observedMatch` and health determination rules, as
  they can otherwise be misleading, and cause propagation of artifacts which are not truly correlated, or worse:
  unwanted artifacts.

# Prior Art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

[Draft RFC Read Resources Only When In Success State](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/556)

[Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)

# Unresolved Questions

[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

It is unclear how to solve for resources which require matching against their spec, but do not conform to the
`observedGeneration` pattern. The same can be said for resources which do not expose sufficient detail to write proper
health determination rules.

# Spec. Changes

[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

> All templates will now have a mandatory `observedMatch` field, which must be an array containing at least one element

Reviewer: Making this optional, rather than required, will mean that Carto will still be able to work with all resources. It will also allow end users to determine if they want to tradeoff performance for artifact tracing.

[Draft RFC Read Resources Only When In Success State](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/556).

# What it is

[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

New fields are added to templates which allow template authors to specify correlation rules using `correlationRules`,
which informs Cartographer of how to compare the resource's output (published in the owner's status) with its inputs
(based on where the input values were substituted into the resource stamped bt template). Where the output does not
expose useful matching information, it is possible to match against the resource's `spec` instead, with some caveats.

Template authors are thought to be the ideal target, as they are likely to have the most intimate knowledge of the
resource that their templates stamp out.

Example matching inputs against outputs with the `correlationRules` field:

```yaml
apiVersion: carto.run/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterSourceTemplate
metadata:
  name: example-source-scanning-thing
spec:
  template:
    apiVersion: my-scanner/v1
    kind: SourceScan
    metadata:
      name: ...
    spec:
      scanUrl: "$(sources.source.url)$"
      sourceRevision: "$(sources.source.url)$"

> correlationRules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  correlationRules:
```

>   - input: "$(sources.source.url)"              #evaluated against inputs in template context
>     output: "$(status.outputs.url)"             #evaluated against resource status

Reviewer 2: a few minor changes in this one suggestion:
- `input` and `output` are overloaded for resource artifacts. Using `expected` and `actual`, other terms can fit as well
- the "input" is setting a expectation for the value to find, updated to use the regular cartographer template syntax
- the output is a path on the stamped object, dropping the template syntax since we don't use it on other values read from the stamped object.

```suggestion
  - expectedValue: "$(sources.source.url)$"              #evaluated against inputs in template context
    actualPath: ".status.outputs.url"             #evaluated against the in-cluster resource
```

the spec of the resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: carto.run/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterImageTemplate
metadata:
  name: example-image-building-thing
spec:
  template:
    apiVersion: my-builder/v1
    kind: ImageBuilderThatDoesntExposeInputDetailsInItsOutput
    metadata:
      name: ...
    spec:
      sourceUrl: "$(sources.source.url)$"
      sourceRevision: "$(sources.source.url)$"
correlationRules:
  - input: "$(sources.source.url)"              #evaluated against inputs in template context
    output: "$(spec.sourceUrl)"                 #evaluated against resource spec
  - input: "$(sources.source.revision)"         #evaluated against inputs in template context
    output: "$(spec.sourceRevision)"            #evaluated against resource spec
```

Since the spec of the resource may change independently of the output, when the `correlationRules` makes any assertion
against the `spec`, Cartographer must also ensure that the current output is a result of processing the current spec by
making additional assertions:

* Resource is healthy, as per [Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)

> * Resource `observedGeneration == generation`

Reviewer 2: the template author should be required to indicate that the resource supports observedGeneration, many resources don't

If these assertions cannot be made, for example, if the resource does not implement the `observedGeneration` pattern,
then Cartographer stops processing the resource and flags an error on it. Great care must also be taken that `healthy`
status rules specified by the template author corresponds to the situation where the output is indeed a result of the
spec with the current `observedGeneration`, otherwise outputs may not truly be the result of an input.

Additionally, relying on the spec to make assertions imposes a further restriction to avoid stalling artifact
propagation: Cartographer must not stamp out any further changes to the resource until it has finished processing the
current spec completely. That is, it must have reached either a Healthy or Unhealthy status (as per

> [Allow Resources to Report Status](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer/pull/738)).

Reviewer 2: We need to avoid situations that could deadlock the supply chain. If an input is passed in that never resolves to Healthy True or False, the stamped resource is stuck, and can never be unstuck because we're no longer writing to its spec.

Author: I've added a `correlationTimeout` setting to the template for now; I'm not sure there's a better solution whilst remaining agnostic.
